# Aftermath



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18950813/054/0004
Portsmouth Evening News - Tuesday 13 August 1895

AN ECHO OF ARDLAMONT.

There has been an echo of the Ardlamont case am the *Daily Telegraph* in the form of this somewhat remarkable notice:—

HAMBROUGH— In loving memory of our dear son, Windsor Dudley Cecil Hambrough, found shot dead in a wood at Ardlamont, Argyllshire, August 10th, 1893, in his 21st year. "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord."



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004160/18941105/051/0003
Ulster Echo - Monday 05 November 1894

THE LATE LIEUTENANT HAMBROUGH'S WILL.

APPLICATION BY MRS. MONSON.

In the Probate Division, London, to-day, an application was made on behalf of Mrs. Agnes Maude Monson, wife of Mr. Alfred John Monson, for leave to issue a subpoena *duces tecum* against Messrs. Davidson & Syme, of Edinburgh, writers to the Signet, calling upon them within eight days to produce to Probate Registry a testamentary document of the late Windsor Dudley Cecil Hambrough, of Ardlamont House, Ayrshire, Scotland, who died on August 10th, 1893. Mr. Sturges, who made application, said it appeared that Mr. Hambrough had insured his life, and just prior to his death had assigned the policies by will to the present applicant. Subsequently the husband of the applicant was put oa his trial, charged with the murder of the deceased, and it appeared that with his solicitors was lodged this document, which was alleged to be a will according to the law of Scotland. Three hundred pounds of the sum due for the defence of Mr. Monson remained unpaid, and the solicitors refused to give up the document until those costs were paid. A discussion arose as to question of jurisdiction, and the President said if a writ was issued, and the application renewed in a week's time, he would have jurisdiction. The motion was accordingly adjourned for a week.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000609/18950125/097/0005
London Evening Standard - Friday 25 January 1895

THE ARDLAMONT CASE. MAJOR HAMBROUGH'S ACTION— JUDGMENT.

In the Court of Appeal to-day, before the Master of the Rolls, Lord Justice Lopes, and Lord Justice Rigby, the case of "Hambrough v. the Mutual Insurance Company of New York," again came up for hearing.—This was an action brought by Major Hambrough, the father and administrator of the late Lieut. Windsor Dudley Cecil Hambrough against the Defendants, the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, upon two policies of 10,000*l.* each, which bad been effected upon the life of the latter seven days before his death, which occurred on the 10th of August, 1893. The Defendants declined to pay the amount of the policies on the ground that they had been granted on the faith of certain fraudulent statements made to them by the deceased and by one Monson on his behalf, to the effect that no insurance office had postponed or declined to effect an insurance upon the life of the former; whereas, in fact, the Reliance Insurance Company had postponed an application, and the Liverpool, London, and Globe Insurance Office had declined to insure Lieutenant Hambrough's life. The case was tried before the Lord Chief Justice and a special jury on the 3d, 4th, and 5th of December last, when the Jury found that the deceased had not made any fraudulent statements, but that Monson to his knowledge done so. The learned Judge thereupon entered judgment for the Defendants, but stayed execution for 14 days to enable the Plaintiff to appeal. The Plaintiff now sought to set aside the judgment for the Defendants and to enter judgment for him, or for a new trial.

Mr. Willis, Q.C., Mr. Boxall, and Mr. Roskill appeared for the Plaintiff; and Mr. Murphy, Q.C., Mr. Finlay, Q.C., Mr. Bray, and Mr. Harvey Murphy for the Defendants.

Mr. Willis, in continuation of his argument, submitted that when the Defendant company accepted the premium the contract was valued, and nothing that A. J. Monson could have said or done before its completion could Invalidate the policy.

Mr. Finlay, Q.C., for the Respondents, quoted the decision of Lord Eldon in the case of the "Newcastle Fire insurance Company v. McMorrogh," and said that it quite applied to the present case. There was a warranty, and the particulars given by Monson and signed by Young Hambrough were true; the evidence showed that they were not, and that invalidated the whole contract. For instance the fact was concealed that the Reliance office had refused to insure Hambrough's life because there was albumen in the water. That was a false representation and enough to vitiate the policy.

The Master of the Rolls asked how it was that Major Hambrough was the Plaintiff in this case when the policy was assigned to Mrs. Monson.

Mr. Finlay said that Major Hambrough claimed as the administrator of the estate of his late son. Mrs. Monson also claimed to recover the amount of the policies, and the action was now pending.

The Master of the Rolls, in giving judgment, said the Lord Chief Justice and the Special Jury who tried the cam, came to the conclusion that the policy had been effected by gross, wicked and impudent fraud, and that Court was now asked to set that verdict aside. Monson and his wife — he did not wish to be hard on her, because she was as much the tool of her husband as the boy Hambrough — desired to have the life of this young man insured, and they sought to insure his life at several Scotch offices. The fact was, as the Lord Chief Justice had graphically said, Hambrough was as greatly in the hands of Monson, who made the statements, found to be false and fraudulent, on which the contract had been based. Young Hambrough signed those statements, Monson made them with his acquiescence, and Monson acted as his agent in effecting the policy of insurance. He stated that Hambrough was coming into a fortune of 200,000*l.*, that he had bought the Ardlamont estate for 48,000*l.*, and that Mrs. Monson, who had lent him the money, wished the policy on his life to secure repayment in case he should die before paying her back. This was a mass of impudent falsehood, but it had influenced the Defendant Company in entering into the contract. Hambrough was answerable for the fraudulent statements made by Monson to effect the policy, and therefore the Defendant Company were not liable at all at common law under the contract. He quite agreed with the view of the law taken by the Lord Chief Justice, who had given his judgment as if the case of the Newcastle Fire Insurance Company were before him. The statements made were the basis of the contract, and, the statements being false and fraudulent, the policy was vitiated. As to the findings of the Jury, they were correct, and fully justified by the evidence. The appeal was hopeless, and only an earnest and able Mr. counsel like Mr. Willis could have sustained it so long in that Court. The appeal would be dismissed with costs—Lords Justices Lopes and Rigby concurred.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000183/18950129/048/0006
London Evening Standard - Tuesday 29 January 1895

THE MONSON EFFIGY CASE.

MONSON v. MADAME TUSSAUD AND SONS (LIMITED).

TO DO

The Plaintiff, Alfred John Monson, sued the Defendants to recover damages for the exhibition of an effigy of himself in the Defendants' Exhibition, under such circumstances as constituted a libel. He also alleged that upon the model were clothes that were wrongly detained from him by the Defendants. — The Defendants, by their pleadings denied these allegation., and further said that the Plaintiff himself had consented to the exhibition of the waxwork model and sold to the Defendants the clothes through an agent of his. — Lord Coleridge, Q.C., and Mr. H. M. Sturgess were for the Plaintiff; and Mr. Murphy, Q.C. Mr.Finlay.Q.C, and Mr.Percy Gye for the Defendants. Lord Coleridge, in opening the case, said it would be affectation on his part to assume that the Jury were ignorant of whom the Plaintiff was; he was a man whose name had appeared prominently in the year 1893 in connection with a somewhat sensational trial that came to end on the 23d December in that year. It would also be affectation in him to suppose that the Jury were not acquainted with the Defendants in connection with the character of the works that they exhibited. The action was brought for damages which he submitted amounted to an actionable wrong committed by the Defendants against the Plaintiff, au actionable wrung in the nature of a libel upon him; and he said that the exhibition of his figure, and that circumstances attaching to the exhibition, contained au imputation upon him. In addition to damages, the Plaintiff asked for what was more important, namely, that an injunction should be granted restraining the Defendants from the continuance of their exhibition. The Defendants said that the exhibition of the figure in their show was uot defamatory, and they claimed a light to exhibit as long as they pleased. The Lord Chief Justice. — What do you say was the imputation upon the Plaintiff conveyed? Lord Coleridge. — The imputation cast upon the Plaintiff was that he was connected in a discreditable manner with the death of Mr Cecil Hambrough. Then, in addition to their first ground of defence, the Defendants said that the Plaintiff consented, or acquiesced, or gave them leave to exhibit his figure, and that if that were so it would take any reasonable cause of complaint out of the mouth of the Plaintiff. As he (Lord Coleridge) understood it, the case for the Defendants upon the question of acquiescence was that a man of the name of Tottenham came to them an behalf of tho Plaintiff, and made a contract with them for the sale to them of some clothes, for the purpose of their being used in their exhibition, further, it was said that Tottenham entered into a «_utrr.ct«ui behalf of the Plaintiff that he should give sittings for the purpose of making the figure as lifelike as it could be made. He (Lord Coleridge) hoped ta if able to prove, not only that these assertions of the Defendants were untrue, but that the Defendants knew they were untrue. Mr. Tottenham was a man who had had relations of a financial character with Monson, and he lodged at a house in Delahay-street. In that house Monson had sublet to himself a room or rooms, which were his place of residence when be came to London. They were furnished with his furniture, and were kept for bim. After the trial in Edinburgh. Monson went to Aerum, near York, where he still resided. Whilst there, he observed advertisements in the papers by the Defendants and by a rival institution of a similar character that his figure was being, or was about to be, exhibited to the public. Under these circumstances he at once Communicated with his solicitor, Mr. Philips, who lived at Birmingham, and in order to obtain information in regard to the matter, be himself, un the _d January, 1894, left York and came to London. Coming to London, he went to 8, Delahay-street, where his rooms were, and left his portmanteau there, taking with him only a few things that were necessary for the moment. He then went and obtained a lodging iv Graham-street, Eaton-square, which be engaged under the name of Morrison. The Jury would understand that the trial at that time was in everybody's mouth, and it was difficult for Monson to go under his own name without being fol- lowed about by pestilent curiosity-mongers, who might wish to make remarks upon his personal appearance. The next morning, the 3d of January, he called at 8, Delahay-street for his letters, and there saw Mr. Tottenham", and told him the object of his visit to London. Of course Monson could not go into the show himself and visit his own effigy, and he asked Tottenham if he would go and investigate the circumstances under which his effigy was exhibited, and give him an account of them. Thereupon they drove in a hansom to Madame Tussaud's, and Tottenham went in while Monson waited outside. He thought it would be abundantly clear that Tottenham at that time formed the idea that some money might be made out et this exhibition if he could only get Monson's leave. Tottenham had a conversation with some of the managers of the exhibition, and after staying in the place for a considerable time came out. Monson mentioned that he wished to meet his brother at Charing-cross, and thereupon the two drove together in that direction. Mon .on did not suspect what had taken place between Tottenham and the managers, and on the way Tottenham asked hi:n if he would sell him his 20- b_r e gun. Hanson replied that he could not do that because his gun was in tha hand, of the authorities at Edinburgh. He, however, asked Tottenham what he wanted a 0-bo_e g\iu for, a::d he replied that be wanted it for a friend. Tottenham then asked him if he knew where he could get a pun of that kind, and Monson replied that there wait a shop at Charing-cross, Whistler's, where he could pot one. They therefore went there and bought a 20-bore gun, which Tottenham paid for with a cheque of his own for 4_ 10s. He had no doubt that that was the gun which was now exhibited at the Defendant's show. Monson, having parted from Tottenham, then went and bad his interview with h;s brother and then went back to Del.-key -street. Tottenham came iv, and suggested that Monson might ?? some money by giving a sitting to Defendants, but Monson at once repudiated such an idea, to adopt which would be inconsistent with his whole course of conduct at this time. It was uec.s=a_-y to j;o ti> Birmingham to convey the information which Tottenham had obtained to the solicitor, and as Tottenham was the person who had seen the exhibition, he said he would accompany Plaintiff to Birmingham. Tottenham said he had one more letter to write, and then he would b _ reauy. The letter having been written and posted, or left for posting, th . two then went to Birmingham together, and stayed at the Grand Hotel. There again Tottenham tried to obtain Mon. son's consent to giving a sitting, and ultimately told him that he had got a cheque from Tussaud's for 50. on the promise that he would sit as a mode!. Monson still repudiated the whole transaction, and that led to the cheque being re- turned, under circumstances which could leave the Defendants in no doubt, not only that Monson had never been asked to sit at the time when the arrangement was made with Tottenham, but that when he was asked he repudiated the whole transaction. No doubt. Tottenham thought that he might be a_l_ to obtain Monson'- consent, but as he taiie.l to do so he took the only course which was open to him and returned the money which had been aske.l for and given under the idea that the consent would be obtained.. It was a very significant thing that tho cheque was not drawn to the order of Monson, who, it was now suggested, was the real principal, but that it was made payable to the order of Tottenham. Iv the affidavits filed when the interim injunction was applied for, moreover, the managers of the Defendants did not hint at the contract upon which they now relied. It appeared that when Tottenham left Monson r.t Charing-cross, he went back with the gun to 3. Delahay-street, to Monson's room, and took a suit of Monson's, which he conveyed to Madame Tussaud's. At that time Monson had no idea of what had been done, and therefore, when the writ was issued, no mention was made ot the clothes which he now claimed should be returned to him. The learned Counsel proceeded to argue that the exhibition of the effigy under the circumstances ot the cast; was derogatory to Monson. and was therefore a libel upon his character. Even if Mr. Monson's figure was placed between two of the most eminent personages, it would be a libel upon him; but it was placed in what was known as Napoleon Room No. asfd which was near the entrance to the Chamber of Horrors, and was one of those rooms for which one pai 1 an extra sixpence iv connection with tl.at place. In the introduction to the exhibition published by the Defendants, and written by George Augustus Sala, it was said that the Chamber of Horrors was set apart for the waxen apotheoses <;f murderers arid other flagitious criminals, and it was worthy of note that in the room where Plain ?? fi__;ire was placed the only other figures represented Scott, who was associated with Mon_»n in regard ta the Hambrough affair, Pigott, the suicide, and Mrs. Maybrick, the poisoner. In the Chamber of Horror, itself was a representation of the scene of the Ardlamont occurrence, and no o:ie would care twopence to see the effigy of :i man who happened to be on the scene when a poor young man took his life, unless for the morbid curiosity attaching to a man against whom something criminal was alleged, if the figure had been withdrawn, there would have been no necessity for the proceedings; and he asked the Jury to say that Plaintiff should not be pi Honed all his life, when 110 public interest was concerned. Mr. Alfred John Monson said he lived at Asnim, in Yorkshire, an'l lie was charged with the murder ot Cecil Hambrough, and the Jury returned a verdict of "Not proven." He bore out the statement of the learned Counsel as to his consulting his solicitor about the exhibition of his effigy, and ..s to his coining to London to examine into the circumstance, connected with it. He had a room at Delahay-street furnished with ?? own furniture, and Tottenham had an office in the same building. Tottenham's business name was Keropton and Co. Witness's ruoi.i was not furnished lor sleeping purposes. Tottenham was to go to the exhibition, and make notes for Plaintiff to place before his solicitor. When Tottenham asked him to sell his 20-bori. gun he said he could not, as it was in the hands of tho Fiscal. He said he wanted the gun for a friend, and Witness said he could easily buy one at the shop next door to Charing-cross Station. They went to the shop and Tottenham bought a gun for 4. 10s.. paid for it, and took it away with him. Tottenham said it was necessary to file an affidavit as to the facts connected with the exhibition, und suggested that he should go to Birmingham with Witness to see the solicitor. He then asked Witness if he would object to his figure being exhibited for a payment of 200/. Witness said it was impossible. Besides, he said he had already given instructions for an action. Tottenham said nothing about the clothes or the sun. That was before they went to Birmingham. At the Grand Hotel, Birmingham. Tottenham told him that he had received a cheque for 50. in reference to his •jiving sittings for the model.  Witness refused to sit, and said he had better send the cheque back at once. Tottenham sat down and wrote a letter to his bankers to return the cheque. He saw his solicitor at Birmingham, and gave him instructions to issue writs and apply for an injunction.

From first to last did you authorise Tottenham to make any arrangement whatsoever with Madame Tussaud's with reference to the exhibition of your figure or otherwise? — I did not.

Did you authorise Tottenham to sell this gun, or any gun, to Madame Tussaud's? — I did not.

Nor to sell anything? — I did not.

Did you authorise Mr. Tottenham to take any of your clothes? — No.

You proceeded with your action? — I did. From first to last I gave uo permission for the exhibition of my effigy.

Examination continued. — He had seen the effigy a few days ago. He went with Mr. Beauchamp Hambrough, the cousin of the late Cecil Hambrough. The Witness then described the position the figure was in in Napoleon Room No. 2. and also said there was the scene of the tragedy depicted in the Chamber of Horrors.

Cross-examined by Mr. Murphy. — He first knew of Mr. Phillips in connection with these proceedings. He received a cutting from a paper containing an advertisement from that gentleman, and communicated with him upon the subject. He had known Tottenham somewhat intimately, and had had money from him, but not much. He denied that Tottenham had very little security, and said that he had raised a loan for bim upon sonic furniture which he had stored, and which belonged to his wife. That would be in May, 1803, before they went to Scotland. He was bankrupt in August, 1892. Tottenham had not given him a farthing for tho purpose of his defence. Ho rented a room in Delahay-street from Tottenham, but he did not sleep there. When he hit his portmanteau there there was some wearing apparel in it. There was a suit of clothes there : but it was not the suit that be wore on the day young Hambrough met his death. He came up in a brown tweed suit, which he chang'-d and left in the portmanteau. The brown suit bad a pair of knickerbockers. Diit he did not think that it had gaiters, he thought that the suit on the model at Madame Tussaud's was one of those he left in his portmanteau. Whilst Tottenham went into Tussaud's he waited outside for him for about half an hour. The Witness proceeded to identify various documents, which he said were iv Tottenham's handwriting. They consisted of letters to Tussaud's in regard to the 507. and its return, and there was also the receipt for the money, which was made out on behalf of A. J. Monson. In one of the letters he said ho had not got the authority he required from Mr. Monson. but he had no doubt he should get it to-morrow. In another he said Monson repudiated the transaction, and refused to confirm the arrangement. Tottenham, when be came out. said be bad seen an effigy of him. and ?? that it was in a disreputable suit of clothes. Nothing was. however, said about Witness's clothes going to Defendant's. He did not think the question about the 20-bore gun an odd one, and he believed Tottenham's statement that he wanted it for a friend. Tottenham had himself shot with Witness's gun, so he knew ail about it. When he parted with Tottenham, be thought the latter said he was going into the City. He did not. when he returned in the evening, miss his clothes. He did that on the Bth of January. His impression was that Tottenham was employed as an agent by Defendants to try and purchase the agreement for the J sitting. He did not know whether it was at Tottenham's suggestion or his that the latter went to Birmingham. He (Witness) paid the fares and the hotel Inil. He did not know of Tottenham going to Louis Tussaud's to get money for permission to exhibit his effigy. He believed he offered another gun and suit of clothe sto Louis Tussaud. He last saw Tottenham at the Leeds Assizes. He prosecuted him nt Leeds for embezzling some property. Tottenham did not before that say that be could uot stand to the affidavit he bad made. Witness denied the accounts of several conversations with Tottenham put to him. He did not say it would be a splendid idea for Tottenham to sell them the clothes and the gun. He did not say he could not appear in the matter, though be did say he could uot himself go into the exhibition. ' He did not leave it to Tottenham to go and negotiate with Tussaud, and Tottenham did not come out and tell him he had offered to sell the clothes and gun. One hundred pounds was not mentioned, but 20... was the price of the sitting : but he would have nothing to do with it. He did not say 100/. was not as much as he expected. He did not go with Tottenham in the hansom to take the gun and clothes to Defendants. He never asked Tottenham to go with him in order to make a bargain with Louis Tussaud. Tottenham told him he had seen the figure at Louis Tussaud's. but he did not say he had asked for m >ney for its exhibition. Tottenham said he bad tried to get them to take it away. He (Witness) did not say he had Seen his solicitor and ascertained that it would be better to go on with the action. He did not say that instead of a matter of 100_. it might then be 1000/. Tottenham did not see the solicitor, as the latter said proceedings might have to be taken in Loudon, and the London solicitor would see Tottenham. The Plaintiff was still under cross-examination when the hearing was adjourned.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000183/18950131/061/0006
London Evening Standard - Thursday 31 January 1895

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE STANDARD.

Sir,—In your report in *The Standard* of to-day, in the action of "Monson v. Tussaud," Lord Coleridge is reported as having insinuated that my son took his own life at Ardlamont. Such an idea has never entered the head of any sane person, and was never suggested at the trial in Edinburgh. Murder or accident were the alternative theories presented to the Jury, and they were constrained to find an equivocal verdict of "Not Proven." As tne suggestion of suicide is totally unfounded on fact, I must beg you to insert this letter in your earliest issue.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

D. A. HAMBROUGH.  
3, Pierrepont-street, Bath, January 29.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000079/18950526/019/0004
Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper - Sunday 26 May 1895

THE ARDLAMONT CASE.

At Bow-street on Thursday *Alfred John Monson* was summoned by Beresford Loftus Tottenham for obtaining 250*l.* by false pretences in connection with the purchase of the Ardlamont estate in 1893. Mr. Crisp prosecuted and Mr. B. Abrahams defended.

Mr. Crisp opened the case at length, describing the facts of the letting of Ardlamont and the death of Mr. Cecil Hambrough. Counsel read in support of the present proceedings a letter which purported to be from Mr. Monson to the defendant to the effect that Mr. Monson was in treaty for the purchase of the Ardlamont estate for 48,000*l.* on behalf of Mr. Hambrough, and that the vendors were willing to accept 250*l.* deposit. A cheque was sent for the 250*l.* by the complainant, but was stopped by him in consequence of the death of Mr. Cecil Hambrough, who died on the day the cheque became due. The cheque for 250*l.* was, however, used before for other purposes. It was paid into a branch of the Royal Bank of Scotland, and was drawn upon immediately for the purpose of paying a premium for an insurance of 20,000*l.* on Mr. Cecil Hambrough's life. Counsel contended there was no truth in the suggested purchase of the Ardlamont estate.

Mr. Tottenham in his evidence said he believed the statements of Mr. Monson in the letters read, that the contract for the purchase of Ardlamont was in preparation, and that the vendors had agreed to accept the deposit, and he was induced to send the cheque produced for 250*l.* on the Bank of England, and made payable to Cecil Hambrough. The endorsement on the back purported to be the signature of Cecil Hambrough. Mr. Cecil Hambrough died on the 10th of August. The witness stopped the cheque on the same morning, and received a telegram in the evening announcing the death of Mr. Hambrough. Had it not been for the representation in the three letters he would not have parted with the cheque.

After the cross-examination of Mr. Tottenham the defendant was remanded.



