# The Ardlamount Case in the Isle of Wight Press

In the process I am exploring of familiarising myself with the public accounts of particular events as reported in the public press, and then "forgetting the facts" in the hope of discovering the story that remains, I have been taking a broad view over as many news reports I can, irrespective of their geographic locale.

But for this story, it might be worth considering what sort of story surfaces if we limit ourselves to forgetting from a basis of what was reported in the local Island press, along with any other local knowledge still available to us form a consideration of local geography and readily available local history.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930819/082/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 19 August 1893

VENTNOR

...

FATAL ACCIDENT TO MR. CECIL HAMBROUGH

The news of a fatal accident having befallen Mr. Cecil Hambrough, the eldest son of Major Dudley A. Hambrough, late of Steephill Castle, Ventnor, spread throughout the town on Saturday last and created painful interest. It appears that the deceased was out shooting with his friend. Mr. Monson, of Ardlamont House, near Loch Fyne, Scotland, with whom ha has been residing, on Thursday in last week, and when crossing a ditch his gun caught in a bush, exploded, and the charge lodged in the unfortunate young man's head, killing him instantaneously.

In more ways than one the death of Mr. Cecil Hambrough under such lamentable circumstances has a mournful interest for Ventnorians. Deceased was a fine young fellow, over six feet high, and next April he would have obtained his majority, when it waa hoped, as heir to the estates, he would have been able to make some arrangements so that his father's affairs, which are in the hands of his creditors, might have been satisfactorily cleaned up. His untimely death will probably put off that long-hoped-for arrangement till the next heir, a brother only a few years old, reaches 21 years of age.

The body of deceased was this week brought to Ventnor for interment in the family vault at the parish church of St. Catherines.

The funeral took place on Thursday afternoon in St Catherine's churchyard, in the presence of a sympathetic gathering of all classes. The burial service was most impressively read by the Vicar, the Rev. J. Hall Shaw. Many of the residents of the town awaited in the church the arrival of the *cortège* from the Cemetery, where the body was conveyed on its arrival at Ventnor. Amongst those present were Mr. T. Gibbs, C.C. (the chairman *pro tem.* of the Local Board), Dr. Coghill, Dr. Woodford, and Messrs. Hue, J. G. Livesay, Price Owen, W. L. Dunfel Stevens, factor of the Ardlamont estate, E. Burnaby, Albert Bull, C.C., James Knight, J. C. Meager, J. Western, M. Hibberd, G. Braham, Welham, O. Prangnell, H. Drover, Newnham, Scott, Crutchley, F. Moor, and O'Donnell. Then were also several ladies present. Whilst the congregation was waiting the organist, Mr. Powell, played appropriate music upon the organ, and as the coffin was conveyed from the church he played the Dead March in *Saul*. The mourners were Mr. Dudley Hambrough (father), Miss Hambrough (sister), Mr. Otho Hambrough (uncle), Mr. Fifer (uncle), Mr. Phil Reeves (cousin), Mr. A. J. Monson, and Mr. Alexander Houston. The coffin was covered by number of beautiful wreaths. They were "From his heartbroken mother, to my boy Cecil"; "From Uncle and Aunt Reeves and Phil, with sincere regret"; "From Uncle Otho, with sincere sorrow"; "From his brother officers of the 3rd Battalion West Yorkshire Regiment"; "From Mrs. Sewell, in affectionate remembrance"; "From A. Houston, with sincere sorrow and sympathy"; and "With deepest sympathy, from Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Liveay." The body was enclosed in handsome panelled oak coffin, with white metal mountings. Messrs. H. and G. F. Ingram were the undertakers.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930819/089/0006
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 19 August 1893

Ventnor Town Amusements

On Monday evening, Mr. T. Gibbs, C.C., (acting for the Chairman of the Ventnor Local Board) presided at a public meeting held in the Board-room called to take into consideration the desirability of promoting a town regatta or other amusements. ...

...

Mr. Ball explained that at a meeting of the Carnival Committee last week it had been decided not to promote a carnival for this year, and a resolution was passed that a letter should be sent to the Local Board asking the Chairman to convene a meeting to take into consideration the idea of promoting a regatta, and sounding the Board as to their willingness to make a general charge of 6d. admission to the Pier for the whole regatta day, 1d. of this amount to go to the band and 4d. to the regatta funds.

...

THE LATE MR. CECIL HAMBROUGH

The Chairman said the business for which the meeting was called was now over. He would with their permission introduce another matter. Doubtless they had all heard of the sad death of Mr. Cecil Hambrough. He (the Chairman) was amongst the decreasing number of inhabitants who could remember that young gentleman's grandfather, and no one who knew him could ever forget his kindness of heart and his sympathy with every movement calculated to promote the interests of the town. Then the father of this young man was well known to them and alike very much respected. Indeed it was his great kindness of heart which led to his misfortunes. They all remembered his ever readiness to lend the beautiful grounds of Steephill Castle for any and every object which was supposed to be of any interest to the town, and his other kind acts were such that he hoped the youngest amongst them would never forget. Coming to Mr. Cecil Hambrough, Mr. Houston had allowed him to see a letter he (Mr. Houston) had received from the deceased only a week before his untimely death, in which this young man, only 20 years of age, having heard that Mr. Houston was not well, invited him up to Scotland, thinking the change of air would do him good. It really seemed that kindness of heart was hereditary with the Hambrough family, for in the midst of his own pleasures this young man found time think of the health of his friend. They in Ventnor knew little of Mr. Cecil Hambrough personally, but this one act alone would stamp his character. He did not know how far it might be convenient in the town to attend the funeral. For himself he should certainly make an effort to do to, for in time of this heavy addition to their many troubles he thought the town would do itself honour by remembering the family and their many kindnesses.

Mr. F. B. Sheppard said he could endorse every word the Chairman had said and if it met the views of that meeting, which was a large and representative one, he would propose that a vote of most sincere sympathy be passed and forwarded to Mr. and Mrs. Hambrough an an expression of the feeling of the town.

This was carried unanimously, and the meeting dispersed.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930902/095/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 02 September 1893

THE FATALITY TO MR. W. D. C. HAMBROUGH

SENSATIONAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE CASE

Our Ventnor Correspondent writes: The one absorbing topic in Ventnor since Thursday is the startling turn the Ardlamont shooting case has take in the arrest of Mr. A. J. Monson on a charge of shooting Mr. Cecil Hambrough, heir to the Steephill estate, whose body was a fortnight ago brought to Ventnor from Scotland for interment.

It will be remembered that on the morning of August 10th Lieut. Hambrough went out to shoot in a plantation close to Ardlamont House, Argyllshire. He was accompanied by Mr. Monson, his guardian, and Edward Scott, an engineer, the latter going with the intention of carrying the game. Both Mr. Hambrough and Mr. Monson had guns. In going through the plantation they separated, and in a few minutes Mr. Monson (according to his statement) heard a shot fired. He called to Mr. Hambrough, asking him what he had killed, but received no reply. Running in the direction from whence the shot came, he found the unfortunate young man lying on his left side in a ditch, with a gunshot wound immediately behind the left ear, and the brains protruding. No one was beside him, and the suspicion subsequently arose that the wound could not have been self-inflicted. The deceased is reported to have been insured in an American office for £10,000, and in view of the mysterious nature of his death the Insurance Company, it is said, has declined to pay. A doctor and police official visited the scene of the occurrence on Saturday, and the body of the deceased is to be exhumed. Since the death of Mr. Hambrough, Mr. Monson has been entertaining a party of friends at Ardlamont House, and yesterday morning he was driving one of his guests to Tighnabruaich, seven miles from the house, to catch the early morning steamer for Greenock. Mr. Monson has been recently under the surveillance of two plain clothes constables, and one of these accompanied the party on the conveyance. When about two miles had been traversed, Mr. Monson and his party were met by Chief Constable Fraser, of Argyllshire, who told Mr. Monson that he wished to speak with him. He got out, and the officer followed. As Mr. Monson's guest was very anxious to catch the steamer, he drove on to the Pier. Mr. Fraser told Mr. Monson that he must consider himself in custody on a charge of having caused the death of Lieutenant Hambrough, of the 4th West Yorkshire Militia, on the 10th inst. The prisoner took the matter cooly, and, entering the officer's trap, went with him and the other constable to the Royal Hotel, where they remained until about 11 o'clock, when Mr. Monson was taken to the county police-office at Inveraray. In the afternoon he was brought before Sheriff Substitute Sharp. On the motion, however, of his agent, Mr. M'Lachlan, the examination was adjourned to admit of the prisoner's Edinburgh agent, Mr. Davidson-Syme, being present. The prisoner is about 35 years of age, is married, and his wife and family are residing at Ardlamont House.

The body of the deceased, which is to be exhumed, was laid in what it was thought would be its last resting place, in St. Catherine's Church, Ventnor, in the same family grave in which another member of the family had been buried.

An application to the Home Secretary for authority to exhume the body was despatched to the Home Office on Thursday morning.

Mr. Monson was on Thursday again taken before Sheriff Substitute Sharp. The proceedings were conducted in private, but it is understood that Mr. Monson adheres to the account already given by him of what he knew of the death of Mr. Hambrough. At the conclusion of the examination, which lasted about half an hour, Mr. Monson was remanded in custody for a week, pending further inquiry. As a prisoner on remand, he is allowed in prison the customary privileges, including the supply of his meals from one of the hotels in Inveraray. Dr. MacMillan, who examined Mr. Hambrough's body two hours after death, gave it as his opinion that death might have been caused by the deceased handling the gun incautiously while getting over a wall. This was on the assumption that he had been using a short 20-bore sporting gun. It was subsequently ascertained that it was a long 12-bore. As to this, Mr. Monson states that they had exchanged guns. Mr. Steven, acting factor of the Ardlamont estate, says that Mr. Hambrough's left side was towards his friend, and he was shot in the right side. His impression is that deceased met his death by falling while his gun was at full cock. Mr. Monson had told him that the death of his friend meant a considerable loss of money to him. Mr. Hambrough was only 23 years of age.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930902/076/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 02 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT SHOOTING CASE.

Writing last night our Ventnor Correspondent says it was rumoured during the day that the Home Secretory had sent an order for the remains of Mr. Hambrough to be exhumed, but up till 6p.m. the Vicar had heard nothing officially. There is little doubt that an order will come, and it is hourly expected.—Another correspondent states that Mr. Monson was the deceased gentleman's tutor, not his guardian.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930909/034/0003
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 09 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT SHOOTING FATALITY.

EXHUMATION OF LIEUT. HAMBROUGH's REMAINS.

EXCITEMENT AT VENTNOR.

Public excitement at Ventnor in this sad fatality and the latest development of the case culminated on Monday, when a party of medical men and officials arrived from Scotland with the authority of the Secretary of State to exhume the body of Lieut. Windsor Cecil Dudley Hambrough for postmortem examination. For several days previously the grave had been visited by hundreds of persons, some taken thither by feelings of sympathy, others from morbid curiosity; but throughout the Undercliff amongst inhabitants there existed but one feeling of the deepest regret at the untimely death of our unfortunate young neighbour and desire that if he had—as suspicion seemed to point to—met his end by foul play, the guilty person or persons should be punished as the law provides. On Monday from an early hour a crowd began to assemble outside the churchyard, and during the afternoon the walls which form the angle of Church-street and The Grove, the latter being rising ground, were lined with spectators. The Rev. J. Hall Shaw, vicar of Ventnor, and the Deputy Chief Constable of the Isle of Wight, Mr. Gibson, were lingering about in a state uncertainty as to when they might expect the party, and it was not till just upon 4 o'clock that they drove in a 'bus to the Royal Marine Hotel. A messenger shortly afterwards came to the Vicar and Mr. Gibson, who proceeded to the Hotel, where the former received the order of the Secretary of State, and he at once placed the churchyard in the hands the authorities. The party from Scotland comprised Mr. J. C. Macullich, of Inverary, Procurator Fiscal; Mr. T. McNaughton, his deputy, of Argylshire; Dr. Littlejohn, the eminent surgeon of Edinburgh; and Dr. McMillan, who represented the Crown; and Dr. Sanders, of Edinburgh, for the prisoner Monson. Messrs. Ingram and Sons were engaged to open the grave and coffin and convey the body to and from the mortuary in Ventnor Cemetery where the post-mortem examination was to be conducted. The grave was opened in the presence of Mr. McNaughton and Mr. Gibson, and at 5.30 the coffin was raised once more to the surface of the ground, apparently unsoiled. It was large massive coffin of panelled oak, with handsome silverplated mountings, and silk cord and tassels on the handles, it being the custom in Scotland for the mourners to grasp the cord attached to the handles when the coffin is lowered to its last resting place. On the occasion of Mr. Hambrough's funeral this custom was, however, dispensed with. Div.-Sergt. Adams and P.C.'s Toomer and Johnson assisted the grave diggers, and the coffin was without delay conveyed to a hearse in waiting, and driven off in charge of the sergeant to the mortuary. As at the churchyard, the public were vigorously excluded from the Cemetery, a precaution which proved very necessary, as in the fading light the post-mortem had to be made on a bier in the open air, so that photographs at the corpse showing the wound in several aspects might be secured.

The medical experts were joined at the Cemetery by Dr. J. L. Whitehead, C.A., who as physician to the Hambrough family had been engaged by Major Hambrough to watch the examination on his behalf. The Major himself was a distracted spectator of the post-mortem examination, but his friends Mr. A. Houston and Mr. J. G. Livesay prevailed upon him to keep in the upper part of the Cemetery, some distance away. The lead coffin inside was found to be leaky, hence decomposition was very great. The corpse was formally identified by Dr. McMillan and Mr. McNaughton, so that Major Hambrough was saved that painful duty. Mr. S. J. Porter was engaged to photograph the corpse, on which he exposed several plates.

Owing to the reticence of the authorities, the representatives of the Press were unable to obtain much information concerning the post-mortem, but certain facts were permitted to transpire. The fatal wound was of a shocking nature, extending in an almost horizontal direction from the base of the brain to the centre of the ear, a portion of which was carried away. There was no singeing of the hair or skin around, nor were any wads found in the wound, as might have been the case had the shot been fired at close quarters; and from this and other appearances the medical experts have arrived at the conclusion that the discharge which killed Lieut. Hambrough was fired from a distance of not less than 14 paces. Several pellets were extracted from the head. Then the horizontal direction of the wound is against the theory of accidental death, for it is impossible to imagine how a gun carried by any one person could get in a position level with and pointing the back of his head and then explode.

Interviewed by our representative, Major Hambrough, while remarking that he was unable to make any statement at the present time, being in a sense in the hands of the police, said that it was a fact that two policies had been effected on his son's life, each for £10,000, in the New York Mutual office, and that a few days before the death of his son they were both assigned to Mrs. Monson, not to the prisoner. The prisoner is stated to be an undischarged bankrupt, so that his creditors would benefit from any sum of money going to him. The assignment to Mrs. Monson by a minor—for Lieut. Hambrough would not have attained his majority till April next—was illegal, and the insurance company had expressed their willingness to pey the £20,000 to the person legally entitled, and there is little doubt that this is Major Hambrough.

In reference to the alleged exchange of guns between the deceased and Mr. Monson, it is stated that since the latter's arrest 16 cartridges made with ordinary gunpowder, of the same bore as his own gun, have been found in the deceased's shooting jacket, and among them was not one amberite cartridge, whereas the prisoner stated that the deceased was shooting with his (the prisoner's) gun and using amberite cartridges. The appearance of the wound, too, is consistent with the belief that a smokeless powder such as amberite had been used in the cartridge. Same little time ago Major Hambrough wrote to the prisoner asking him for the whereabouts of his son. To this communication Monson replied, "Sir. I am not your son's keeper, but I believe is at Risley Halt." This letter will be produced at the trial. The procurator-fiscal and deputy, with medical witnesses, left Ventnor at 7.28 on Tuesday morning. Dr. Littlejohn, of Edinburgh, who performed the operative part of the post-mortem examination, arrived in London in the afternoon, and had a long interview with the Lord Advocate at the office of the Secretary for Scotland.

The body was reinterred the parish churchyard at 10 o'clock on Monday night without any religious ceremony, and the proceedings were watched by a large number persons, who lingered about till the last sad offices in connection with this lamentable fatality were performed. Throughout the day the Island police, under Deputy Chief Constable Gibson, did excellent service in assisting to maintain a quiet decorum on the part of the spectators, and although the utmost respect and sympathy were evinced by the crowd, yet the efforts of the police were highly appreciated by the investigators, the Deputy Procurator-Fiscal expressing himself to that effect. P.S. Cass kept the gates of the graveyard throughout the day.

Another correspondent writes: On being raised to the surface the coffin was conveyed to a hearse and removed to the mortuary at the Cemetery, which stands on the range of hills at the back the town, forming a continuation of the famous St. Boniface Down. It was intended to examine the body in the mortuary, but this was found be too confined for such an operation, and it was taken out and placed upon a bier in the Cemetery yard. The body was removed out of the case in which it was enclosed within the oak coffin and examined in the open. The outer coffin was scarcely soiled, but the lead coffin was not air tight, and in consequence the body was greatly decomposed. The examination lasted over two hours, and was not completed before darkness set in. Photographs of the wounds in the head of the deceased were taken in several respects.

Major Hambrough's statement that his son's life was insured in the New York Mutual Office in two policies of £10,000 each, and these were assigned to Mrs. Monson, is of importance when it is remembered that an emphatic denial was given to a statement published that an assignment had been made to Mr. Monson, the accused. Major Hambrough also stated that his son had lodged farther proposals of insurance with an English office, but the offer had been declined in consequence of the largeness of amount.

The Procurator-Fiscal and his assistant arrived at Inverary from Ventnor on Wednesday. They declined to state the result of their visit to the south, but it is understood to be unfavourable to Mr. Monson, who was on the same afternoon committed for trial on the charge of murder, and ordered to be removed to Greenock Prison. He has all along declined to make any statement. In this he acts upon the advice of his counsel, although at the same time he maintains his entire innocence. According to Scotch law, nothing in the case is allowed to officially transpire. One fact which has come out very prominently is that Mr. Monson has all along been in pecuniary difficulties, although he boasted that there was great wealth at the disposal of himself and Mr. Hambrough. Nothing was ever hinted of his having been adjudged a bankrupt. He produced such an impression of wealth that there was much competition for the custom of Ardlamont House. The story put forth that Mr. Hambrough was to succeed to quarter of a million is now regarded as entirely absurd. The trial will probably take place in about a month's time.

Artists are daily arriving at Ardlamont to take sketches on the spot where Mr. Hambrough's dead body was found, but they are not allowed to get near it. Policemen, by order of the Sheriff, guard the place night and day, the authorities being desirous to keep everything intact, particularly a small rowan tree at the foot of which Mr. Hambrough fell; they say that the twigs are ploughed as if by the leaden pellets from a gun. The authorities are determined to keep this tree, as well as the surroundings, intact until photographs are taken, and it is said to be quite likely that the tree will be cut down and produced in evidence. The authorities admit that they have not the slightest trace of the man Scott, who formed one of the shooting party on the day of Mr. Hambrough's death.

A Glasgow paper has stated that if the case goes tor trial some sensational revelations as to the antecedents of the parties will be made. Mr. Monson, the accused, was tutor to the deceased, and is 33 years of age, having been born in 1860. He is a younger son of the late Rev. Thomas J. Monson, rector of Kirkby under-Dale, his mother being daughter of the fifth Viscount Galway. Mr. Monson is a member of the family of which Viscount Oxenbridge, the Master of the Horse, is the head, his grandfather, the Hon. and Rev. Thomas Monson, rector of Bedale, having been a son of the second Baron Monson, and the grand-uncle of the present peer.

Ardlamont Estate, where the fatality occurred, is one of the oldest in Argyllshire, and has been in the possession of the Lamonts of Cowal from time immemorial. Its present size is nothing to what it was im its early history. The estate has a beautiful situation between the Kyles of Bute and Loch Fyne, its whole extent covering 11,000 acres. The mansion-house is distant some six or seven miles from Tighna-Bruaich, and stands on a gentle acclivity overlooking Loch Fyne. Colonel Lamont, the former proprietor, died not long ago, and his executors disposed of the estate to Monson and Hambrough, who became joint proprietors. Monson, however, seems have been released of the purchase, as the estate is in the market again, the price asked being £80,000.

TRAGIC AFFAIR AT LYMINTGON.

As in some degree the result of the Ardlamont case a tragic affair occurred at Walkhampton, near Lymington, on Tuesday. A gamekeeper named Henry Carr, in the employ of Mr. J. P. Heseltine, was talking to the landlord of a local public-house when the conversation turned on the Ardlamomt shooting case. Carr maintained that it was possible for Lieut. Hambrough to have shot himself from behind, and in order to demonstrate this he (Carr) took up his gun and placed it behind his back with one hand and reaching down with the other hand pulled the trigger. The gun unfortunately happened to be loaded, and Carr blew the top of his skull off to the horror of all present. Assistance was immediately rendered, but it is feared that the poor fellow's recovery from hie severe injuries is hopeless.—Later accounts state that the unfortunate man survived only a few hours. He leaves a widow and nine children.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18930909/015/0006
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 09 September 1893

THE MYSTERIOUS DEATH OF A VENTNOR GENTLEMAN.

The connection of the unfortunate Lieutenant Hambrough with our own district gives a special local concern in what at present promises to be a mystery exceptionally difficult of solution. It is not our intention to offer any opinion as to the precise cause which led to the young fellow's lamentable death; and it is enough to point to the fact that everyone is asking whether it was a case of murder or of accidental homicide. At first there was no suspicion of foul play, and there was so much in the antecedents of the Lieutenant and his tutor, Mr Monson, to suggest close intimacy, that no thought of anything but mishap occurred to any one. On the previous day, indeed, the one man is said to have saved the other's life by fetching aid promptly when a boat accident had occurred. It is said that the boat struck on a rock and filled, and that Mr Monson swam to the shore and fetched the aid by means of which his companion was rescued. Despite the fact that they were both exhausted by this experience, particularly Lieut. Hambrough, the two men, and the vanished Mr Scott, were out shooting rabbits the next morning by 6 o'clock. That was the fatal morning; and less than two hours afterwards the young Lieutenant was lying dead on the ground. The story first told was that as he was clambering through a hedge he managed to discharge the contents of his gun into his own skull, and thus to kill himself accidentally. This story was accepted, and the body of the unfortunate man was brought South and buried at Ventnor, amid the signs of the deepest mourning on the part of his "tutor," Mr Monson. How the feeling of dissatisfaction with the story of the death was started, and how it grew into a suspicion of foul play, is not stated; but when once the suspicion had been formed it developed rapidly, until Mr Monson was arrested, and the whole detective force in the country were scouting for the "Mr Scott." In the Isle of Wight, where the family of the deceased is so well known, the interest has been painfully acute and strained, and the circumstances of the exhumation of the body has added materially to the strength of the feeling. What light a further examination may throw upon the facts it is, of course, impossible to say, and until some authoritative statement in an official form is made known it will be well to attempt to form no hasty conclusions. It is easy enough to start a hundred theories, each of which can find much in the roughly known facts to support it, but each only a contradiction of the others. The records of criminal cases show that there is no limit to tho eccentricity of crime, and there is nothing in any evidence which has yet transpired to "prove" either the conclusion of guilt or that of innocence of the persons now implicated; but there are un-questionably, a vast variety of details, inferences from which may be drawn to bear out both. It is emphatically a very strange case, and the events which are made known from day to day only serve to heighten its extraordinary character. Among the most significant facts is that of the disappearance of the third person supposed to be present on the occasion, Mr. Scott. He is presumed to have come South with the body, and to have been present at the funeral in the Isle of Wight. He was, in fact in evidence so long as there was no suspicion of foul play. But he has vanished and it is certainly strange that, despite the hue and cry raised everywhere, he should not have come forward. This may, of course, be open to explanation. Men have disappeared before now and have been actually ignorant during the time of their absence that the whole country was eagerly seeking to find them. They have re-appeared, and have then made all plain. Mr Scott may do this; but his absence cannot fail to embarrass Mr Monson to a certain extent, and in the latter's interest the sooner Mr Scott is found the better. Meanwhile the mystery deepens.

The remains of the late Lieutenant Windsor Cecil Dudley Hambrough, who was believed to have been accidentally shot at Ardlamont, Scotland, were exhumed in the churchyard of the parish church of St. Catherine's, Ventnor, on Monday afternoon, by order of the Home Secretary. Shortly after 4 o'clock, Mr J. G. McCulloch, of Inverary, Procurator Fiscal, and Mr McNaughton, Deputy-Procurator Fiscal of Argleshire, arrived with the authority of the Home Secretary. They were accompanied by Dr. Littlejohn, of Edinburgh, and Dr. McMillan, the gentlemen who examined the body before burial, and were appointed to examine the remains on behalf of the Crown; and Dr. Sanders, of Edinburgh, who was present on behalf of the accused, Mr Monson. Dr. Whithead, of Ventnor, afterwards joined them in the interests of the Hambrough family. The body was encased in a massive oak coffin with silver mountings. On its removal from the grave, it was placed in a hearse and taken to the mortuary at Ventnor Cemetery, which is situated on the upper range of hills in line with St. Boniface Down.

On the coffin lid being raised, it was found that rapid decomposition had set in, but the specially appointed medical men were none the less able to make the necessary examination, the body being laid on oil sheets on the grass outside the mortuary, the public being vigorously excluded from the Cemetery. Photographs of the deceased's head were taken before and after the dissection, showing the nature and extent of the fatal wound. Several pellets were found in the head, and it was demonstrated that the shots entered the head from the back of the ear, a portion of which was carried away; in fact, a later telegram from Ventnor says that Professor Littlejohn's investigation does not support the theory that Lieutenant Hambrough was shot accidentally; there was no singeing of the hair, nor was any trace of wadding found in the wound. Major Hambrough, who formally identified the coffin, was a distracted spectator of the whole proceedings. In the course of conversation, subsequently, Major Hambrough said it was a fact that his son's life had been insured in two sums of £10,000 each, and that both policies had been assigned to Mrs Monson, whose husband is in custody in connection with the case.

Further particulars state that Mr Monson, when at Ventnor, was accompanied by a person who gave the name of Stevens. They occupied rooms at the Royal Marine Hotel, and an official there states that soon after dinner on the first evening of their stay— Monday, August 21st—Mr Monson seemed very depressed, and was very unwell, in consequence, he said, of worry through this sad accident, and of having entertained a large party at his castle in Scotland. So bad, indeed, did he become that it was found necessary to send for a local doctor, who prescribed for him, and next day he was much better. On Tuesday evening he left the hotel, and proceeded to the station, where he met Lieutenant Hambrough's father, and escorted him to the hotel where they both remained until after the funeral on Wednesday, when Mr Monson discharged the account, and they left together. On the following Sunday a large number of people entered the churchyard to look at the grave. Though Mr Monson visited the Vicar (Rev. J. H. Shaw) at the time of the funeral, that gentleman was unaware of his identity, but believed him to be the Scotch undertaker.

The certificate of death was taken to the Vicar by Mr Monson, and Mr Houston, the clerk of the Ventnor Local Board, who was for a long time agent to the estate. Mr Shaw saw them in his study, and they handed him a certificate, signed by Alexander Steward, of Kilpinan; it did not state any cause of death, that not being required. The explanation given to him of the accident was that the deceased stepped on some furze which concealed a drain. Every effort was made by Mr Monson to have the body interred in the family vault; but there is a strong feeling in Ventnor against disturbing the bodies in vaults beneath the church; consequently the Vicar declined to act without an order from the Home Office, which did not arrive in time. Consequently the coffin was deposited in the grave of an aunt, almost opposite the front entrance of the beautiful church, which the deceased gentleman's grandfather erected. At the graveside the Vicar noticed that Mr Monson was greatly affected, which, to use his own words, surprised him, for he had never seen an undertaker weep at a funeral before.

The body was brought to Ventnor in charge of a gentleman believed to be the missing Mr. Scott. When asked how the accident occurred, this gentleman said, "I was out with the party, but no one really knows how it happened." Mr Scott remained until after the funeral.

Mrs Monson, the wife of the prisoner, is stated to be a youngish lady of prepossessing appearance, and is the daughter of Mr Fisher, a large and well-known colliery proprietor in the Barnsley district of Yorkshire. The publication of the fact in the newspapers that Scott is wanted has resulted in the officials at Inverary being literally deluged with telegrams regarding the movements of men bearing a similar name. None of them, however, referred to the proper person.

Monson has been committed for trial.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18930916/102/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 16 September 1893

VENTNOR

THE HAMBROUGH MYSTERY.

Further progress has been made this week by the Procurator-Fiscal in the work of precognoscing witnesses in connection with the mysterious death of Lieutenant Hambrough at Ardlamont on August 10. It is quite evident that the most stringent inquiry is being made. Almost every person the estate who was at the house, or near the offices, or who had any dealings with the shooting tenants has been examined. There are strange rumours abroad respecting the still missing Scott.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18930923/007/0005
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 23 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY

It is rumoured that Lieutenant Hambrough, who was shot at Ardlamont, has left a will, which it is expected will be put in at the trial.

A London contemporary says:— Major Hambrough's belief that Monson exercised an hypnotic influence over his son may seem at first sight incredible and insufficient to account for the sudden but continuous change of manner which the deceased evinced towards his father and mother after he had been committed to Monson's care. When compared with a case we know something of the idea does not seem so impossible. A few years ago an officer in the army exercised a hypnotic power over a young man of his acquaintance staying in the same town where he was quartered. Wherever the officer went the youth followed him— in fact, so great was the man's influence over the boy that it was generally remarked upon in the neighbourhood. While continually expressing a wish to go up to London he was apparently quite unable to do so. On several occasions he even went so far as to go to the station and take his ticket. Meeting an old friend one day on the platform, he announced his intention of travelling up with him, but as the train came into the station he turned round and walked away, saying "I can't go up to-day."

The scene of the Ardlamont tragedy was put up for sale yesterday at Edinburgh. Tho estate extends to 11,000 acres, with a rental of £3,726. The upset price was £80,000. No offer was made, and the sale was adjourned.

The Hambrough family, now prominently before the public, bears one of the oldest names in the Isle of Wight. They are the ground landlords of Ventnor, which is built on their property. The rent roll is said to be some £7000 a year, and the ground of Steephill Castle, the family seat, are amongst the most extensive in the district. The unfortunate victim of the Ardlamont tragedy would have become heir by his grandfather's will to this property, together with the London estate and the estate of Pitwell Hall. Colonel Hambrough himself resides principally at Houghton, Stockbridge. He is the patron of two livings in Hants.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000170/18930930/022/0006
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 30 September 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY

A Witness interviewed.

Mr J. Dunn, a Newcastle jeweller, who has been spending the summer in Scotland, was interviewed on Tuesday evening by the Blairgowie correspondent of the Central News. He appeared greatly upset at being by accident brought into the position of practically the chief witness in so painful a case. Amongst the places he stayed at during the summer was a cottage close to the road leading to Ardlamont, and the room which he occupied afforded views to the north and south of the public road. On the morning of August 10th Mr Dunn said ne was looking to the south, when he observed Lieutenant Hambrough, Mr Monson, and the man Scott walking along the public road towards the cottage. There was, however, nothing in their appearance or manner to notice particularly. The Lieutenant and Monson each carried a gun, but the third man had no weapon. At a certain point of the road Mr Dunn lost sight of the party, but they again came into view from the other window. He could not understand, he said, why he took such notice of the party, but as a matter of fact he set himself to watch their movements. The three men jumped the fence skirting the public road, and went together until about half way to the wood. There they separated, Lieutenant Hambrough going almost straight ahead, and Monson and Scott proceeded in an oblique direction to the left. Their courses were respectively followed until he lost sight of them in the wood. Shortly afterwards Mr. Dunn heard the report of a gun from the direction of the wood, but he paid little attention to this, fancying that the party had found sport. He was astounded when not long afterwards he learnt that Lieutenant Hambrough was dead, and he visited the spot where the body was found. Questioned as to whether there was any probability or chance of the parties converging by the time he heard the gun fired, Mr. Dunn declined to offer an opinion. He preferred to leave that problem for others to solve. A simple statement of facts which came under his observation was all that he was accountable for, and all that he should give to anyone anywhere.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931007/076/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 07 October 1893

THE "HAMBROUGH" MYSTERY.—ANOTHER DEVELOPMENT.

The latest development from Ardlamont is the discovery, on the top of the dyke in the wood where Lieut. Hambrough was shot, of a piece of the unfortunate young officer's skull, with three pellet marks in it. The position in which the piece of bone was found is regarded as strong evidence that Lieut. Hambrough was shot while in an exposed position, and not while at the bottom of the ditch, as was suggested. The discovery will probably have important bearing on the case when the trial comes on.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931007/115/0007
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 07 October 1893

VENTNOR (HOLY TRINITY).

The annual harvest festival and children's thanksgiving service was held at Holy Trinity Church on Sunday, when the interior of the edifice was, as usual, very tastefully decorated. ... The Hambrough memorial window, an object of sorrowful interest in the light of recent events, was adorned with fruit and flowers of various kinds. ...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931014/082/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 14 October 1893

"HAMBROUGH" TRAGEDY.

ANOTHER REPORTED EXHUMATION.

A Glasgow correspondent states that the two pieces of bone which were found close to the scene of the Ardlamont tragedy were sent to the Crown authorities at Edinburgh, and have become an important link in the chain of evidence. The correspondent states that there has been another exhumation of the body and that the skull has been removed from the grave at Ventnor, and during the last few days has been submitted to the most minute examination by the Professor of Anatomy in Edinburgh University. Two small bits of bone, each about the size of a thumb-nail, have been pieced on the part of the skull which received the full force of the shot. The discovery of the bone will be a material point the case, bearing on the question whether the pieces were shot away by a gun close to the head or at a distance. Casts of the skull have also been taken, and will be produced at the trial.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931021/164/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 21 October 1893

THE "HAMBROUGH" TRAGEDY.

In our last Saturday's issue it was stated, on the authority of a Glasgow correspondent, that there had been another exhumation of the body of Lieut. Hambrough at Ventnor, and that the skull had been removed to Edinburgh. This has been disputed, and it would appear that thw statement was not wholly accurate. "It is doubtless perfectly true," says a correspondent, "that the grave at Ventnor has not been disturbed a second time, but notwithstanding all denials the skull of Lieut. Hambrough is in Edinburgh. The head was parted from the body when first exhumed at Ventnor, and was carried down to Scotland by the Procurator-Fiscal. It will be one of the productions of the Crown at the trial. There has been no new opening of the grave since, because, of course, that was unnecessary.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931216/093/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 16 December 1893

THE ALLEGED MURDER OF LIEUT. HAMBROUGH.

TRIAL OF MONSON AT EDINBURGH

The trial of Alfred John Monson, charged—along with Edward Scott, who has eluded arrest—with the murder and also with the attempted murder of Lieut. Windsor Cecil Hambrough Ardlamont, Argyleshire, in August, began on Tuesday at the High Court of Justiciary, Edinburgh, before Lord Kingsburgh, Lord Justice Clerk. The proceedings opened with the calling of the accused Scott, and, as he did not appear, application was made for his outlawry. Over 100 witnesses are cited for the prosecution. The Solicitor-General for Scotland, Mr. Asher, Q.C., M.P., conducts the case for the Crown. With him are Mr. J. A. Reid, Mr. J. C. Lorimer, and Mr. R. U. Strachan (advocates-depute), and Mr. J. R. Baxter (assistant-advocate depute). The prisoner was represented by Sheriff Comrie Thomson, Mr. John Wilson, and Mr. W. Findlay (advocates), Mr. Malcolm (advocate), appeared to watch the case on behalf of Major Hambrough, of Steephill Castle, IW., father of the deceased.

The Judge having asked Monson if he adhered to his plea of "Not guilty," tendered at the former sitting of the Court, the prisoner replied, "I do, my lord," and jury of 15 was than balloted and sworn.

After two jurymen had been challenged, the indictment was read by the Clerk.

The first witness called was Mr. James Brand, C.E., Glasgow, who produced plans of the scene of the fatality. He admitted in cross-examination that the accuracy of his productions depended on the correctness of the information given him.

James Wright, butler at Ardlamont House, deposed that Scott was treated as one of the house party. On August 9th, after dinner, he was told to wait up for the gentlemen, as they were going out fishing. In the night one of them, he thought it was Hambrough, came back for a lamp. He said the boat had sunk and they had swum ashore. Half an hour afterwards he heard them in the smoking-room. He went to Monson's and Hambrough's rooms and found their clothes wringing wet. He went to bed at 2, leaving them in the smoking-room. When he got up at 7, the gentlemen were up before him. At about 9 he saw Monson and Scott, and Monson told him Hambrough had shot himself and was quite dead. He said the body was just in the wood. Witness went into the shrubbery, but could not find it. Monson took him to it. It was lying on the wall by the side of the ditch. The body was taken into the house, and witness advised that doctor should be sent for. Monson and Scott were sticking together all the morning. Witness asked Scott if he could not wait till the inquiry was over, but he said his business took him a way. Cross-examined:— All the party seemed on good terms.

Archibald Whyte, gardener at Ardlamont, gave evidence as to the removal of the body, saying there was no gun near, and he could see no blood except under the head. There was not the slightest appearance in the ditch of any weighty body having fallen into it. He found two small pieces of bone 6in. and 9in. away from the head. These he buried. From 15 to 17 paces from the body there were two trails. Examined as to the boat, he said the hole was too large for a plug-hole, and seemed to have been cut with a knife. When he was looking at the boat, Monson came and said it was upset. He said the purchase of the estate by Hambrough had all been settled, except that they were to see Major Hambrough. There was no appearance in the ditch as if the ferns had been trodden down by people in lifting the body.—In cross-examination witness admitted telling the Procurator-Fiscal he saw no tracks in the grass, which was a lie.

Stuart McNicol, estate joiner at Ardlament, said Monson borrowed his boat, which had cork plughole in the stern. He afterwards found a hole in it, which seemed to have been made with a knife. He found a clasp-knife on the shore. This witness also corroborated as to the condition of the spot on which the body was found and of the ditch.

Hugh Carmichael, ploughman, saw Monson going towards the house on the day of the death, carrying two guns.

John Steven, factor on the Ardlamont estate, found Monson and Scott in the smoking-room after the body of Hambrough had been taken home. Witness said "This is a terrible job," and Scott said it was; he did not think Monson spoke. Scott told him he did not have a gun, he was carrying the rabbits. Monson afterwards said Hambrough was on a wall, Scott in the middle, and he parallel with the road. He heard the shot and went on to the end of the wood, and there cried "Hallo, Hambrough, where are you? What have you got?" Not getting any answer he went along the dyke where Hambrough should have been, and was horrified to find the body. He pointed to two places, and after that said "To tell you the truth, Mr. Steven, I don't know where we lifted him from." Witness saw no appearance or mark of a man having fallen at either place. As to the boating accident, Monson said the boat struck on a rock. Hambrough could not swim but Monson was good swimmer.

WEDNESDAY.

On the opening of the court on Wednesday, the examination of the witness Steven by the Solicitor-General was resumed. He described going after luncheon with Monson end Dr. Macmillan to see where the body was found. Monson was excited. He accompanied Monson to Ventnor with the body about a week after, when Monson was under police surveillance. He told witness he had gone to the keeper's for a 20-bore gun which Hambrough was in the habit of using. When he got back he found Scott and Hambrough gone, the latter with his (Monson's) gun, a 12-bore.— Cross-examined: Monson borrowed McNicol's boat because another which he had was not safe. When he stooped down to lift Hambrough's body, he noticed very strong smell of whiskey. Monson looked as if he were crying when the body was taken to the house. He could detect no smell of singeing. He formed the opinion that the shot must have been fired within the distance of the length of the barrel, or it would have been more scattered. The doctor spoke of the shot having nearly missed. An inch or half an inch less, and it would not have been fatal. When Scott was about to be taken by the doctor into another room Monson said it was pity Scott could not wait. He said that in England there would be an inquest. The doctor said they were particular there, too, but he was confident his report would satisfy the authorities. One required to be careful when walking on the wall, especially when carrying a gun. On a wet morning it would be more difficult. There was a hole on the top of the dyke into which man's foot might very well drop. That was near the body. Monson seemed dazed and shocked at what had happened.

James Dunn, watchmaker, who was at Ardlamont on holiday, saw Monson, Hambrough, and a third man together. Hambrough went to the right and the others to the left. After they had passed out of sight he heard a shot.—Cross-examined: If the men had continued in the direction in which they were going, they could not have met.

George Lamont, gamekeeper, said the plug-hole was not in the usual place.—Cross-examined: Monson informed him that Hambrough told him that he had cut a hole with his knife in M'Kellar's boat and plugged it. Hambrough's gun had had its stock broken by falling on rocks while out shooting. Witness was accustomed to relieve Hambrough of his gun when crossing a ditch. After Hambrough's death Monson was terribly excited and distressed. Monson explained that Hambrough was that day trying an amberite cartridge in the 12-bore gun.— Re-examined: M'Kellar's boat did not need a plughole.

John Douglas. gamekeeper, had never heard of rocks in Ardlamont Bay on which a boat might strike.

Dugald M'Kellar spoke to lending a boat to Hambrough. It had no marks of damage the rocks.— Cross-examined: A boat might bump on a rock sufficiently to throw a man out who was standing in it and yet get no damage.

Alexandrina Shand, of Ardlamont, having given evidence.

John Tweedie, herring buyer, stated that he heard two screams apparently from the north point of the bay on August 9th.—Cross-examined: The screams did not indicate that it was from any one in distress. The rocks on both sides of where the boats lay made the place dangerous.

Peter Galbraith, fisherman, spoke to the absence of rocks in the bay.

James M'Phee. "boots" at Tighnabruaich Hotel, said Scott arrived tar steamer on August 8th. When Monson met them Scott seemed annoyed. When he left Ardlamont be seemed nervous man.

Hugh Carmichael, groom, said Monson was mostly crying after the accident.

James Donald, who spoke to the proposed purchase of a yacht by Monson and Hambrough, said, in cross-examination, that the latter told him he had a very narrow escape when out shooting, the charge going past his head.

Jessie M'Leod, housekeeper, said Scott was treated as as ordinary gentleman. Hambrough and Monson were on friendly terms.

Samuel James Porter, photographer, Ventnor, said that in October last, at the request of the Procurator-Fiscal of Argyleshire, he made certain photographs of a skull. These photographs were produced.

After some other evidence,

Hugh Jeffrey, curator of the Ventnor Cemetery, was called and said he was present when the body Hambrough was disinterred on September 4th. He saw Monson in the Cemetery on August 16th, the day before the funeral took place, and had a conversation with him. Witness said. "What a sad affair it was." Monson said, "It was." Witness then asked how it happened, and Monson said,"We were going out shooting with a fellow officer and we got on to the ground about an hour beforehand. Mr. Hambrough in getting over 4ft, wall either struck his gun or fall with his head on it. It went off and blew out his brains. The whole thing was done in instant." Monson said Mr. Hambrough was staying with him at the time.—Cross-examined: No one else was present when this conversation took place. Monson gave it off in the same rapid way as witness had done. Witness had not read very many newspaper paragraphs about this case. He did not take a daily paper. He got *LLoyds Weekly*, but not always. Monson had said that fellow-officers were going down to shoot, but witness did not merely assume that it was they who were with Hambrough. Monson said, "We were going out for a day's shooting with his fellow-officers." He had not seen anything about that in the newspapers.

Further evidence followed, including that of James MacNaughton, gun-maker, Edinburgh, who detailed experiments he had made, leading him to the conclusion that the fatal shots were fired from distance of 9ft. from the deceased's head. He could not see any possibility of the wounds having been self-inflicted, accidentally or otherwise. The two tracks came alongside the place from which it appeared to him the shot had been fired.

THURSDAY.

In cross-examination, on Thursday morning, Mr. MacNaughton said his theory was that Hambrough was standing erect. If he were stooping, stumbling, or inclining his head, the conclusions would have to be modified. Under the direction of doctors he fired at three corpses in the city mortuary at Edinburgh, but did not look at the result of the shots. —Mr. Comrie Thomson: I do not wonder; it was a ghastly job.

Dr. Henry Duncan Littlejohn, lecturer on medical jurisprudence and medical officer of health, Edinburgh, said by instruction of the Crown he attended the exhumation of the body of the deceased. Lieutenant Hambrough, at Ventnor on September 4. The Deputy Procurator-Fiscal Argylshire and Dr. Macmillan, Tighnabruaich, were also present, and Dr. Saunderson, limn Edinburgh, attended as representative of the accused. The report on the *post-mortem* examination was then handed in. It stated that the deceased died from shock, the result of a gunshot injury of the skull and brain, and subsequent loss of blood. It was signed by Dr. Littlejohn and Dr. Macmillan. The witness expressed the opinion that the direction of the wound was from behind forwards. He thought it impossible that the injuries could have been caused accidentally by the deceased. Would have expected deceased to have fallen in a heap when shot, but there might have been automatic or convulsive movements of the limbs to alter the position of the limbs; there would be no spring forward. The conclusion as to the cause of death depended very much upon whether it was true that the place pointed out as that where the deceased fell was really the place where he was shot.—Re-examined: The finding of pieces of bone would settle the question as to where he was shot. The track of the body, if lifted, would have been well marked with blood.

Dr. John Macmillan gave Monson's's account of the affair. He stated that he was 50 yards off when he heard the shot. He said that the night before he and Hambrough had gone out fishing, and the plug went out of the boat when they were a mile from shore. Acting on the statements of Monson and Scott, witness certified that the death was due to accident, but his final opinion after the accident was that it could not have been so.

Dr. Macdonald Brown and Dr. Patrick Heron Watson also gave evidence, the latter giving it as his judgment that death was the result of a shot fired by other man about 9ft. off.

Dr. Joseph Bell gave similar evidence, and added that he could imagine a perfectly honest and competent person finding a modus by which this might have been accidental.

John Graham M'Lean deposed as to Hambrough signing two proposals of insurance on his life in the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, to be contained in two policies of £10,000. Monson paid the premium with a cheque signed by his wife. Monson said he was trustee and guardian of deceased, who was coming into a fortune of £200,000, and was about to purchase the Ardlamont Estate, of the purchase price of which Mrs. Monson was going to advance £20,000. Letters were put in signed by deceased, assigning the policies to Mrs. Monson.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931223/101/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 23 December 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY

TRIAL OF MONSON, AND VERDICT

The trial of Alfred John Monson, army tutor, of Ardlamont House, Argyleshire, on charges of attempting to murder, and murdering Lieut. Windsor Cecil Hambrough, at Ardlamont, Argyleshire, in August last, was resumed on Saturday last at the High Court of Justiciary, Edinburgh, before the Lord Justice Clerk, Lord Kingsburgh.

Charles W. Graham, solicitor, London, said his firm acted for the trustees ofJohn Hambrough, great grandfather of Cecil Hambrough. Major Dudley Hambrough was tenant for life of certain properties under the will. The Ventnor estate was worth about £1300 annually, the Middlesex estates about £1900, without the brick royalties, which varied from £400 to £700. The proceeds of Steephill were invested in railway debenture stock, and would produce about £800, a total of £3980. Major Hambrough also had a prospective interest in Pipewell, subject to his uncle, Oscar Hambrough, dying childless.

Major Hambrough, father of Lieut. Hambrough, said he was 44 years of age, and as grandson of John Hambrough he succeeded his father in 1862 in the life interest of the estates. He came of age in 1870 and succeeded into possession. Cecil was the oldest of five children, and was 20 last May. In 1885 witness found his affairs becoming embarrassed, and in 1888 he created a mortgage to the Eagle Insurance Company, and the interest fell into arrear, the mortgage being foreclosed about February, 1891. His brother Oscar depended on his uncle Oscar, who was 59 years of age, a widower with no family. In the autumn of 1889, witness had introduced Cecil Tottenham, who made him a weekly allowance. Tottenham introduced him to Monson in May or June, 1890. He understood Monson to be an army tutor, and the introduction was with the view of his training his son for the army, payment to be made when the financial affairs of the witness were arranged. An attempt was to be made to get the estates from the Eagle and transfer them so as to reduce the interest. Tottenham failed, and Monson was to try to carry out the arrangement. At the beginning of 1892 he terminated the arrangement with Monson and put his affairs in the hands of Mr. Fuller, solicitor. He displaced Monson because he had reason to distrust him. Witness also endeavoured to have his boy removed, but found Monson's influence operated against his advice. Mr. Fuller, with the approval of witness, tried to get his son away from Monson. During the time Monson was endeavouring to arrange his affairs witness granted three documents to him. He then had confidence in Monson. The first was, he thought, a bill for £5000, signed by Monson and witness in May, 1891; the second a mortgage of September, 1891, for, he thought, £3000, tsigned by witness only. Monson said the first was for too large an amount and he could do nothing with it. Witness understood it had not been negotiated, but he did not receive it back. The third document was a mortgage for £2600 granted in the same month. Monson did not explain why this was required, and witness signed it because he was aked to. These were all the documents granted to Monson to the best of his recollection. He got small sums from Monson, in all under £200. He did not recollect giving the mortgage (produced) for £5000, and the signature to a second mortgage for a similar amount was not his. The signature of his son in full he could not recognise, but he was of opinion it was not his son's signature. Coming to his son's death, witness said that when he arrived at Ardlamont Monson said he was out for a walk before breakfast in the meadows when he heard a shot fired. Witness understood that Cecil was the only one who had a gun. Witness asked to see Scott, but Monson said he was so affected that he could not remain and had returned to Glasgow. At Ventnor, where the funeral took place, Monson told witness there would have been a policy for £50,000 carried out with the Scottish Provident Institution if his son had lived. He said nothing about two policies for £10,000 each having been carried out a few days before the death. He said there was a small policy for £400 held by Mrs. Monson, but the premium had not been paid. —In the course of his cross-examination (which included the reading by counsel of various letters from Cecil Hambrough expressing confidence in the Monsons) witness said that after the death of his son he wired from Glasgow to Monson for money to enable him to go to Ardlamont. Monson met him and gave him £10 at Ardlamont, and paid the funeral expenses, he supposed, and his railway fare back to London as well as his hotel bills at Ventnor. Witness told him to send the account to Mr. Prince. Mr. Prince had no money of his actually in hand. When he got to Ardlamont he was greatly distressed, but his memory was clear.

On Monday further evidence as to insurance policies and the financial position of the parties was given, and on Tuesday the most interesting witness called was the brother of the accused Scott or Davis, who gave his name as George Sweeney. He said his brother Edward was 27 years of age, of very thin build, and was consumptive. Witness gave no information to the police officials about his brother's whereabouts, because he did not know il . he had not known since the middle of September. His family thought he had gone to Australia, but were not sure. He had not written at all; the only explanation witness could give of this fact was that his brother was extremely ill. His brother had not been in Scotland to his knowledge this year.—After hearing of other evidence the case for the Crown concluded, and the first witnesses were called for the defence on Tuesday.

On Wednesday Dr. Hay, Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in Aberdeen University, expressed his belief, as the result of investigations and experiments, that the injury to the head of Lieut. Hambrough which caused his death could have been accidentally inflicted by a gun in the hand of the deceased himself, that the shot could not have been fired at a greater distance than four feet, and that certain pellet marks on the rowan tree and other trees in the immediate vicinity of the place where the accident took place were at least two or three months old when he visited the spot on September 14. Dr. Sanders, Edinburgh, concurred with Professor Hay's evidence. —Monson's governess said that her master and Lieut. Hambrough were always on the best of terms, and Tom Speedy, factor on a neighbouring estate, thought it was quite possible that Cecil Hambrough might have fallen and perhaps thrown the gun from him, as he believed the late Lord Dalkeith did. The gun might easily have caught in the brush. He had ascertained from experiments he had made that amberite powder fired from a short distance would not singe hair. —Edward Lang, of Pall Mall, said that in April Lieut. Hambrough ordered a pair of hammerless guns from him. Whilst there he took up a rifle and snapped it right in line of witness's forementioned when Hambrough left the shop witness exclaimed, "Did you ever see a fellow handle a gun in such a way before? He will either shoot himself or some of his friends."

On Thursday the evidence for the defence was closed, and the Solicitor-General, in a speech of six hours' duration, addressed the jury for the prosecution. He reviewed the history of the case, contending that the theory of accident was altogether untenable in regard to both.

Yesterday (Friday), in an eloquent speech for the defence, Mr. Comrie Thomson contended that there was an utter absence of motive for the crime on Monson's part, and if he had wished to murder Hambrough it was preposterous to imagine that he should bring a third party to witness the deed. He regarded the failure of Scott to appear as the greatest calamity for his client that ever befel mortal man. He claimed as much consideration for the medical evidence for the defence as was given to that for the prosecution, and said if the jury had any doubt his client was entitled to the benefit of it.

[By telegraph.]

Last night the Central News telegraphed:— "The Ardlamont trial concluded at a quarter to 5, when the jury, after 45 minutes' deliberation, returned a verdict of "Not proven." When the jury returned into Court with this verdict loud cheers were raised and were repeated by an immense crowd which had collected outside the Court-house. Monson was at once released and received the congratulations of his friends. The Judge's summing up was greatly in favour of the prisoner.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931230/105/0007
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 30 December 1893

DECEMBER

12. Trial of Alfred John Monson, charged with the murder at Ardlamont, in August, of Lieut. Hambrough, of Steephill Castle, Ventnor, commenced at Edinburgh.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000170/18931230/004/0004?browse=true
Isle of Wight Observer - Saturday 30 December 1893

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY

Major Hambrough and his family were at one time very well known ia the Isle of Wight. Their residence at Steephill Castle, Ventnor, and the active part which the Major took in local social functions, as well as his liberality and hospitality, all tended to make him a prominent and popular figure, in the southern part of the Island especially. But, after a time, it began to be rumoured that hospitality and liberality had been carried too far, and the family left the Island to reside elsewhere. The son, Cecil Hambrough, was a young fellow who, though a mere lad when the family left Ventnor, had made many ties there. It was generally understood he was intended for the Army. When, therefore, the news reached Ventnor that he had shot himself while out shooting in Scotland, great interest and concern were manifested, which culminated in intense excitement when the body, which had been interred at Ventnor, was exhumed for examination, and when the news came that Monson, the Army tutor, with whom Cecil had been living, had been arrested on suspicion of being concerned in the poor young fellow's death. The trial, at which the case has been sifted, terminated last Friday, and the avidity with which every detail has been followed, renders it unnecessary to reproduce the evidence. The trial ended, as most of those who followed it thought it would end, in a verdict of "Not proven," which the Scotch Law enables a jury to return. Deeply involved, as the Hambroughs were known to be, few in the Island were prepared for such a history of shifty schemes to raise money and educate young Cecil as were revealed at the trial. It appeared that Major Hambrough, having mortgaged his life interest in the family estates to the Eagle Insurance Office, was unable to pay the interest, and the office foreclosed. A financial agent in London, by the name of Tottenham, who had formerly been an officer in the Hussars, very kindly tried to help ths Hambroughs. His efforts were, however, of no avail and in 1890 he introduced Major Hambrough to any Army tutor, named Monson, who undertook to prepare Cecil for the Army. He took young Hambrough to live with him, first at Risely Hall, in Yorkshire, and afterwards to a house in Ardlamont, Scotland, to which Monson moved at Whitsuntide 1893. Monson must have possessed great capacity for impressing people with his *bona fides*, for, notwithstanding the fact that he had been made a bankrupt, that his wife's estate was heavily mortgaged, and that he himself (as revealed by the evidence at the trial) was in such a state of impecuniosity that both he and his wife had to pledge their jewellery and other articles, he yet managed to obtain a year's lease of a house at the large rent of £450 a year! It is not surprising a gentleman, possessed of such financial ability as this, should endeavour to raise money for the Hambrough's and himself, the security being young Hambrough's prospective interests under the will of a relative. For days the Scotch Jury heard nothing but details of the efforts of Monson not only to secure this end, but to insure the lad's life for very large sums. Finally, the Mutual Insurance Company, New York, issued two temporary policies of £10,000 each, available for 60 days, with with the assignment of these by young Hamborough to Mrs Monson. On August 9th, 1893 singular to relate, young Hambrough met with a boating accident in Ardlamont Bay, the plug of the boat in which he and Monson were rowing having come out, and the boat having filled. Cecil escaped from that *contretemps*, but on the morning of the following day he died from the effects of a gunshot wound received in a wood at Ardlamont. Who inflicted that wound? The case for the Crown was that Monson had killed Hamborough in order to obtain the insurance money, and there was certainly considerable room for suspicion. A impecunious and (as shown by the evidence) not altogether scrupulous man, having £20,000 on the death of the young fellow, might have compassed his death. In reality, however, the dead man had not made such an assignment of the policies, on his life, as would have any legal effect in enabling Monson to obtain the money. The whole kernell of the case rested on the question— Did Monson know this? Did he think he was going to get the whole or part of the money? For the defence, it was pleaded that Monson was thoroughly aware that the whole of the assignments were valueless, and that being the case he hid no motive for compassing Hambrough's death, but far greater interest in keeping the young man alive. Assuming this to be true, the whole case falls to the ground. In other respects the case was exceedingly weak against Monson, resting, as it did, entirely upon circumstantial evidence. It was not impossible that young Hambrough might have accidently killed himself, although the Crown experts did not consider it by any means probable. But there was evidence to prove that young Hambrough was careless with his gun, and it was also shown that similar accidents had occurred. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Jury, seeing the many gaps in the evidence, took refuge in their national verdict of "Not Proven." That there were many dark points in the case was undoubted. The evidence about the guns — the condition of the dead man's skull — the position of the body — the marks on the trees — and the strange disappearance of a man by the name of Scott, who was staying with Monson at Ardlamont — all combined to intensify suspicion, and to deepen public interest in a case which remains full of mystery still, a light only being thrown upon thy manner in which some pretentious but ingenious persons manage to overcome the disadvantages of impecuniosity.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18940106/063/0004
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 06 January 1894

THE ARDLAMONT MYSTERY.

The Press Association understands that several matters in dispute between persons connected with the trial will sooner or later occupy the attention of the English Courts. There are cross actions pending between Mr. Tottenham and Major Hambrugh in respect to financial transactions, and in another case Major Hambrough will be the defendant in a suit to be brought by the Mercantile Bank (Limited). It is expected that this case will come on for hearing at the end of the present month.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18940113/100/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 13 January 1894

THE MYSTERY OF ARDLAMONT.

Rumour continues to busy itself about the Hambrough case. It is now stated that Mr. Monson promises to publish in a few days a perfect solution of the great mystery, as well as the true facts about Scott. Mr. Monson believes, we are further told, that his book will "create considerable excitement and alarm in the public mind respecting the methods and procedure adopted against an innocent and helpless man." It is also stated that Mr. Monson has received a letter purporting to come from Scott, in which the writer says he intends to give himself up, and that he is going to forward his diary so that it may be included in Mr. Monson's book.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18940303/059/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 03 March 1894

THE LATE LIEUT. HAMBROUGH'S ESTATE.

Letters of administration of the personal estate and effects, valued at £19,734 5s. net and £20,050 gross, of Windsor Dudley Cecil Hambrough, late of Swansea Villa, Station-road, Bexhill on-Sea, Sussex, lieutenant 3rd York Militia, who died on the 10th of August, 1893, at Ardlamont, Argyleshire, a bachelor and intestate, have been granted to his father and next-of-kin, Dudley Albert Hambrough, of 68, Edith-road, West Kensington, whose sureties, in the sum of £40,000, are Henry Albert Reeves, of 7, Grosvenor-street, and William Godfrey Hambledon, of 28, York-street, Middlesex, physician.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18950126/121/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 26 January 1895

THE HAMBROUGH APPEAL

Major Hambrough's appeal against the judgement invalidating the policy of insurance on his son's life was before the Court of Appeal yesterday. The appeal was dismissed.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18950406/104/0005
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 06 April 1895

THE AFFAIRS OF MAJOR HAMBROUGH.

Major Hambrough came up for public examination at the London Bankruptcy Court on Thursday. The statement of affairs showed gross liabilities of £12,533, of which £6979 is unsecured, and assets £12,946. In examination by the Official Receiver, the Debtor stated that the only asset was an interest in certain policies on his late son's life. That interest had been decided against him and now he had no assets whatever. His sole expectation of paying his debts was by arranging with his son when he came of age to cut off the entail. He was not now in possession of the estate, the mortgagees having foreclosed. —The examination was concluded.


TO DO: Entail in law eg https://englishhistoryauthors.blogspot.com/2020/05/entailment-in-english-inheritance-laws.html


--
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18850103/062/0007
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 03 January 1885

VENTNOR

Cricket.— At the annual meeting of the Undercliff Cricket Club at the Commercial Hotel, Mr. Beaumont Atkinson presiding, the secretary (Mr. Hoey) announced a deficiency in the funds of between £9 and £10, which it was hoped that the public will liquidate by subscriptions. The obtaining of a suitable ground as a cricket field has long been a difficulty in Ventnor, owing to its peculiar configuration, and by way of overcoming this, Mr. A. Houston, on behalf of Major Hambrough, announced amidst cheers that arrangements might be made during the next fortnight for hiring a ground on the Steephill estate at £25 per annum, also that the owner would subscribe £5 a year to the club funds. About £150 is needed to level the field and erect a pavilion, &c., and it was also decided to accept the kind offer of Major Hambrough, and to issue an appeal to the gentlemen resident in the neighbourhood for donations towards effecting this much-needed object. The chairman promised a liberal donation when £100 had been raised, and the members separated in very hopeful spirits.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18850228/075/0008
Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 28 February 1885

THE CRICKET GROUND.— No less than 26 men have found employment in laying out the new cricket ground.

[TH: Ventnor pier was also constructed this year]

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18850418/049/0005
Cricket club

Isle of Wight County Press - Saturday 18 April 1885

UNDERCLIFF CRICKET CLUB.—A general meeting of those who have interested themselves in the pro- Ciao!' of a suitable ground for cricket and football in Ventnor was held in the Local Board-room on Tuesday evening, at which some sixteen persons were present, presided over by Mr. T. A. Raynes. The hon. surveyor (Mr. J. G. Livesay) reported that the ground had now been completed satisfactorily according to contract, the price agreed upon being £136 18s. 3d., of which a balance of £24 18s. 3d. remained unpaid. It war decided to draw a cheque for this amount in favour of the contractor. Mr. Livesay also stated that there was a liability of another £30 or £40, the cost of taking up and re-laying turf at 3s. 9d. per rod, so as to afford an additionally large ground. This had been an after thought by which good results were obtained at a trifling expense. The surveyor was asked to obtain the exact cost by measuring the work. The secretary (Mr. Hoey) read a total list of subscriptions amounting to £178, of which some £27 was outstanding, and it was resolved to ask Mr. Balaam to collect these without delay. A letter was read from Mr. G. Mew, of Newport, offering his services as caretaker of the ground, and it was resolved to leave the matter of his engagement with the secretary. The applicant wan stated to be a very suitable man and a good cricketer, who was in the employ of the Seaforth Highlanders last season. The secretary having reported Mr. Hambrough's willingness to loan the grounds of Steephill Castle to the club for Whit-Monday, it was resolved to organise some athletic sports and apply for the engagement of the band of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders on the occasion. Messrs. Dorin and Cuffe were then added to the committee, and Mr. Barker erased, he having left the Island. The subscription to the club was fixed at 10s. 6d. per annum, all other details being left to the committee. A vote of thanks to the chairman concluded the meeting.

---

Hambrough lodge of oddfellows

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002636/18460530/024/0005
London Journal and Pioneer Newspaper - Saturday 30 May 1846

VENTNOR, ISLE OF WIGHT.—On Tuesday, May 19th, the members of the Loyal Hambrough Lodge (4004), in the Southampton District, celebrated their first anniversary. About eleven o'clock the Officers and Brothers proceeded by the Ventnor band and accompanied by the splendid banners of the Southampton District, formed in order of procession and proceeded to church; where an excellent and appropriate sermon was preached by their worthy pastor the Rev. J. N. Coleman. At the termination of the service, the procession reformed and proceeded through the most interesting parts of the Undercliff, and finally to the spacious new Lodge-room, Saracens' Head Inn, where fifty members and friends sat down to an excellent repast provided by Host Littlejohn. After the cloth had been drawn, the chair was taken by the respected surgeon of the Lodge, H. B. Suthett, Esq., supported by John Hudson, Esq., of London, hon. mem; and P.G. Dodd. The Vice-chair was filled by N.G Fish, supported by G.M. Christensen and V.G. Webber. The Chairman gave the usual loyal, patriotic, and fraternal toasts, which were enthusiastically received. 